Add PURE-3: Scudo (#9)
uptane/pures: pure3.md

# PURE-3

* PURE: 3
* Title: Scudo: Adding Supply Chain Security Capabilities to Uptane
* Version: 1
* Last-Modified: 2022-03-30
* Authors: Marina Moore <>, Aditya Sirish <aditya.sirish@nyu.edu>, Lois Anne Delong <>
* Status: Draft
* Content-Type: <text/markdown>
* Created: 2022-03-30

## Abstract

## Motivation

Software supply chain attacks are on the rise with the
[2021 State of the Software Supply Chain report](https://www.sonatype.com/hubfs/SSSC-Report-2021_0913_PM_2.pdf?hsLang=en-us),
noting a 650% increase in 2021. But, it was the
[2020 Sunburst attack](https://www.cynet.com/attack-techniques-hands-on/sunburst-backdoor-c2-communication-protocol/) that really made both

> the government and corporate CISOs take action.

Reviewer: take out "the" in line 20 "..made both government and corporate...."

> Affecting more than 100 companies and 9 government agencies, Sunburst malware was uploaded via

Reviewer: "Affecting more the 100 companies and 9 government, the cause of the attack was Sunburst malware that had been uploaded via a routine update..."

a routine update from Orion software produced by SolarWinds. The attack taught both
public and private concerns some hard lessons, such as:

* The very thing designed to protect the security of software-patches and updates that fix routine vulnerabilities-can also be used to deliver malware that can damage or corrupt.
* As software products contain third-party components, program developers are
  not in complete control of the contents of their products.
* Malware can linger undetected for extended periods of time, allowing it to
  infect every system that touches it. The Sunburst malicious code was part

>   of an update released by SolarWInds in the spring of 2020, yet it was not

Reviewer: "SolarWinds"...remove the capital 'I"

  reported until December of that year.

Automotive software supply chains are particularly tempting targets for attackers. This is
because automotive software runs on a large number of vehicles and can be difficult

> > [Something is off in the second part of this sentence]

Reviewer: In line 35 I raised a question about the wording of a sentence. I didn't edit here because I'm honestly unsure of what we're trying to state here "can be difficult to update to recover quickly..." The phrase "to update" feels out of place. Shouldn't it be "an  recovering quickly from such an attack is a difficult proposition?" Or, do we need the notion of "updating" here?

Author: ```
Automotive software supply chains are particularly tempting targets for
attackers. This is because automotive software runs on a large number of
vehicles and updating all of them to recover quickly from an attack is a
difficult proposition. As such, strategies that can secure automotive software
supply chains are vital.
```

Does this read better?

Reviewer: Much better.

to update to recover quickly from an attack. As such, strategies that can secure automotive
software supply chains are vital.

## Specification

Note: The reader is expected to be familiar with the in-toto specification.

We propose in-toto as an option to achieve software supply chain security
alongside the Uptane deployment. In such a model, in-toto can be backed by

> the Uptane root of trust using Uptane's delegation structure to distribute

Reviewer: "...the Uptane root of trust, and use Uptane's...."

all of in-toto's metadata. Essentially, in-toto metadata is used
to attest to the steps performed in the software supply chain itself, while Uptane

> is used to securely distribute the ECU images and their in-toto metadata.

Reviewer: "...is used to securely distribute that metadata alongside the ECU images."

<!--in-toto is a framework that is used to secure software supply chains. In its default
configuration, a policy, or "supply chain layout," is created by the owner(s) of the
software supply chain. This layout metadata defines the various steps that must be
performed in the supply chain, the actors authorized to perform each step, and the flow
of artifacts in and out of each step. When each authorized actor performs a particular step,
they generate a "link attestation" that records the artifacts, the command run, and other
details about the environment. Finally, the link attestations can be verified against the
layout to determine if the actions performed were legal.-->

### Modifications to the Repositories and Vehicle Interactions

In this document, we propose updating one of Uptane's two repositories
to store in-toto metadata alongside the images. The Image repository is recommended

> as its contents are typically signed for using offline keys as opposed to the

Reviewer: Line 63 "...as its contents are typically signed for using offline key, while the Director repository typically uses online keys."

Author: Went with "usually" for the last clause to avoid repeating "typically"

Director repository that uses online keys.

When an image is submitted to the Image repository, it must be accompanied by its in-toto

> metadata. For every image, its corresponding in-toto layout and link metadata are noted in the opaque

Reviewer: Second sentence "The in-toto layout and link metadata for every image are noted in..."

"custom" field of the image's entry in Targets metadata. This way, there is no ambiguity about
the in-toto metadata to be used when an image is fetched and verified. Further, Uptane's delegations

> model can be used to make this entire process more scalable, as it may not be practical for the top level Targets role

Reviewer: "Further, As it may not be practical for the top level targets role to issue new metadata for every update, Scudo's use of Uptane's delegations model can make the entire process more scaleable.

delegated role. If verification passes, the actual in-toto metadata files—layout, links,
and public keys—must be downloaded and their hashes must be compared with the Uptane
metadata. With these two checks, Uptane’s secure delivery properties are extended to the in-toto
files. These files can then be used with confidence by the client to perform in-toto verification.

### Resource Constrained ECUs

The addition of in-toto metadata generates additional overhead, which can be
problematic for resource constrained ECUs. Uptane already accounts for resource
constrained secondary ECUs by providing a separate Partial Verification workflow.
This document assumes that such ECUs are incapable of performing in-toto verification
and therefore will expect other capable ECUs, perhaps the Primary ECU, to perform in-toto
verification on their behalf. In this model, while every
ECU may not be verifying the software supply chain of the images it is expected to install,
verification is still happening on the individual automobile. Essentially, there is no
difference in the functioning of Partial Verification secondaries and their Full Verification counterparts.

> It is important to note that there are some automobiles that have no ECUs capable of providing even a basic level of software supply chain

Reviewer: "It is important to note that some automobiles may have no ECUs capable of providing

The summary link does offer some evidence that the repository performed in-toto verification
on behalf of the automobile, but it is **not** a sufficiently strong replacement for actual
verification on the vehicle. A key issue with the stop-gap option is that it turns the Image repository into a
single point of failure and therefore can only be trusted as long as the repository remains secure. As such, this model must only be adopted as a stop-gap option until 
the update system can be transitioned to the full model in which in-toto verification happens on individual vehicles.

## Security Analysis

Scudo is an extension for Uptane that adds in-toto's software supply chain security
properties. Therefore, its threat model is a combination of the threat models of Uptane
for the delivery of the software artifacts, and in-toto for the development of the image as
it passes through the software supply chain.

in-toto is a comprehensive framework that secures each step in the software supply chain. Furthermore, it
plays well with other systems and tools that attempt to secure specific aspects of the

> software supply chain. in-toto can be used to enforce policies pertaining to the flow of artifacts through

Reviewer: "For example, though in-toto can be used to enforce policies pertaining to the flow of artifacts through the supply chain, and can provide proof of the people or bots authorized to make changes at each step, it does not intrinsically...."

the supply chain and the people or bots authorized to make changes at each step, but does not,
for example, intrinsically provide mechanisms to store the metadata. The repository can instead

> leverage systems, like Grafeas or Sigstore's Rekor, to store the metadata. Both of these systems already have support

Reviewer: Next sentence..."Yet, since systems like Grafeas or Sigstore's Rekor already have support for in-toto, the repository can instead leverage these systems to store the metadata."

for in-toto. Similarly, in-toto does not provide the information found in a Software Bill of Materials (SBOM)

> in a standardized manner. SBOMs have become an important tool to software supply chain security as awareness

Reviewer: Line 147 "Similarly, in-toto does not provide the information found in a Software Bill of Materials (SBOM)
in a standardized manner. With the importance of SBOMs growing in the past few years due to both the recognition that knowing the components in a software artifact is vital to supply chain security and because they are at the heart of a number of new regulations and standards, this could be seen as a limitation.

# PURE-3

* PURE: 3
* Title: Scudo: Adding Supply Chain Security Capabilities to Uptane
* Version: 1
* Last-Modified: 2022-03-30

> * Authors: Marina Moore <>, Aditya Sirish <aditya.sirish@nyu.edu>, Lois Anne Delong <>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Authors: Marina Moore <marinamoore@nyu.edu>, Aditya Sirish <aditya.sirish@nyu.edu>, Lois Anne Delong <>
```

Therefore, for each installable target, the updater will need to download and
verify the Uptane metadata that signs for the in-toto metadata, either the
Targets role or a delegated role. If verification passes, the actual in-toto
metadata files—layout, links, and public keys—must be downloaded and their
hashes must be compared with the Uptane metadata. With these two checks,
Uptane’s secure delivery properties are extended to the in-toto files. These
files can then be used with confidence by the client to perform in-toto
verification.
### Resource Constrained ECUs

The addition of in-toto metadata generates additional overhead, which can be
problematic for resource constrained ECUs. Uptane already accounts for resource
constrained secondary ECUs by providing a separate Partial Verification
workflow. This document assumes that such ECUs are incapable of performing
in-toto verification and therefore will expect other capable ECUs, perhaps the
Primary ECU, to perform in-toto verification on their behalf. In this model,
while every ECU may not be verifying the software supply chain of the images it
is expected to install, verification is still happening on the individual

> automobile. Essentially, there is no difference in the functioning of Partial

Reviewer 2: This isn't quite true. The partial verification secondaries are relying on the security on the primary

Author: Just took another pass at this paragraph, emphasizing the reliance on another ECU for supply chain verification. Also replaced "functioning" with "update workflow" because these constrained ECUs don't actually have to do anything different. Does that help?

signer role. This way, the key used to sign the summary link metadata is
securely bootstrapped and can be rotated in case of a compromise.

For each target image, the _custom_ field points to the summary link rather than
all the in-toto metadata. The client must download and verify the Targets
metadata for the summary link and, if this passes, download and verify the hash
and signature on the summary link. Once the authenticity of the summary link is
established, the client must verify that the hashes in the products field of the
summary link match those of the image.

The summary link does offer some evidence that the repository performed in-toto
verification on behalf of the automobile, but it is **not** a sufficiently
strong replacement for actual verification on the vehicle. A key issue with the
stop-gap option is that it turns the Image repository into a single point of
failure and therefore can only be trusted as long as the repository remains
secure. As such, this model must only be adopted as a stop-gap option until the
update system can be transitioned to the full model in which in-toto
verification happens on individual vehicles.

## Security Analysis

> Scudo is an extension for Uptane that adds in-toto's software supply chain

Reviewer 2: You should define Scudo earlier in the doc

Author: Done, good catch!

security properties. Therefore, its threat model is a combination of the threat
models of Uptane for the delivery of the software artifacts, and in-toto for the
development of the image as it passes through the software supply chain.

in-toto is a comprehensive framework that secures each step in the software
supply chain. Furthermore, it plays well with other systems and tools that
attempt to secure specific aspects of the software supply chain. For example,
though in-toto can be used to enforce policies pertaining to the flow of
artifacts through the supply chain, and can provide proof of the people or bots
authorized to make changes at each step, it does not intrinsically provide

> mechanisms to store the metadata. Yet, since systems like Grafeas or Sigstore's

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure how these storage mechanisms would work in the context of Uptane. Also, discussion of storage should probably be in the specification rather than security analysis

Author: That's a good point. Do you think we can do away with these integrations altogether? They're in the whitepaper in the appropriate section and I don't know that they belong in the specification either.

Author: I've removed mention of specific storage mechanisms.

Rekor already have support for in-toto, the repository can instead leverage
these systems to store the metadata. Both of these systems already have support
for in-toto. Similarly, in-toto does not provide the information found in a
Software Bill of Materials (SBOM) in a standardized manner. With the importance
of SBOMs growing in the past few years due to both the recognition that knowing
the components in a software artifact is vital to supply chain security and
because they are at the heart of a number of new regulations and standards,
in-toto is working to develop capabilities that can express SPDX and CycloneDX

> SBOMs as attestations. This means the distinct security properties of both

Reviewer 2: the second half of this paragraph sounds like motivation for using in-toto, and should go near the top of the document

Author: I've created a separate Reasoning header for describing why in-toto was selected as the technology to pair with Uptane.

than 100 companies and nine government agencies, the cause of the attack was
Sunburst malware that had been uploaded via a routine update from Orion software
produced by SolarWinds. The attack taught both public and private concerns some
hard lessons, such as:

* The very thing designed to protect the security of software-patches and
  updates that fix routine vulnerabilities-can also be used to deliver malware
  that can damage or corrupt.
* As software products contain third-party components, program developers are
  not in complete control of the contents of their products.
* Malware can linger undetected for extended periods of time, allowing it to
  infect every system that touches it. The Sunburst malicious code was part of
  an update released by SolarWinds in the spring of 2020, yet it was not
  reported until December of that year.

Automotive software supply chains are particularly tempting targets for
attackers. This is because automotive software runs on a large number of
vehicles and updating all of them to recover quickly from an attack is a
slow and difficult proposition. As such, strategies that can secure automotive
software supply chains are vital.

> ## Reasoning

Reviewer 3: This section is odd. What are you really trying to say here? You start by talking about in-toto, but end up with SBOMs. Are you talking about one, or the other, or both? If both, why the focus only on SBOMs, and not something else?

P.S. I understand why you need to talk about SBOMs (because every Uncle Sam wants it) but the reasoning should be more about why in-toto as a solution to the problem above.

Author: Took another pass at it, does it look better?

Author: Updated the motivation as well to better talk about why we need in-toto for end to end guarantees.

validate that a provided SBOM is complete.

## Specification

Note: The reader is expected to be familiar with the in-toto specification.

We propose in-toto as an option to achieve software supply chain security
alongside the Uptane deployment. In such a model, in-toto can be backed by
the Uptane root of trust, and use Uptane's delegation structure to distribute
all of in-toto's metadata. Essentially, in-toto metadata is used to attest to
the steps performed in the software supply chain itself, while Uptane is used
to securely distribute that metadata alongside the ECU images. This combination
of in-toto for software supply chain guarantees and Uptane for secure
distribution of ECU images and in-toto metadata is called Scudo.

### Modifications to the Repositories and Vehicle Interactions

In this document, we propose updating one of Uptane's two repositories to store
in-toto metadata alongside the images. The Image repository is recommended as
its contents are typically signed for using offline keys, while the Director
repository usually uses online keys.

When an image is submitted to the Image repository, it must be accompanied by

> its in-toto metadata. The in-toto layout and link metadata for every image are

Reviewer 3: Actually, there are at least two options for the layouts:
1. Either we include them in the custom targets metadata for each artifact.
2. Or we don't.

There are pros/cons to each. By including them, we allow attackers to associate incorrect (but not malicious) layouts with images. By not including them, we need other mechanisms for clients to map layouts to images (e.g., clients must somehow know out-of-band which layouts to use and when).

Author: Yes! Here, we're mostly specifying the first option. Should we specify both? How much detail would we have to provide about what out-of-band techniques should look like?

Reviewer 3: We ultimately should, but perhaps don't need to worry about them just yet. Please create an issue to track?

Author: https://github.com/uptane/pures/issues/10 Done.

noted in the opaque "custom" field of the image's entry in Targets metadata.
This way, there is no ambiguity about the in-toto metadata to be used when an
image is fetched and verified. Further, as it may not be practical for the top
level Targets role to issue new metadata for every update, Uptane's delegations
model can be used to make this entire process more scalable. Instead, delegated
roles can be used to sign for the image itself and its in-toto link metadata.

> However, in-toto layouts and the key artifacts used to verify them should be

Reviewer 3: Not necessarily: just secure/offline keys, which may belong to the top-level targets role, or a delegated targets one.

Author: Fair, this is over-specific because we took the top level targets keys to be offline. How does it look now?

signed for by the top level Targets role.

> Once the Director repository decides which images are required and signs Targets

Reviewer 3: Please clarify whether or not the Director should also sign any in-toto metadata, particularly for PV secondaries.

Author: In Scudo, we haven't modified the functions of the Director repository at all. Should we explicitly state that?

Reviewer 2: Yeah, you could clarify that the director behavior has not changed

metadata for them, the vehicle must fetch the images and all the metadata using
the interfaces provided by both the repositories. In this phase, the Director
repository can continue signing targets metadata for the images, as per the
default functioning of Uptane, and serve the metadata to the automobile. The
automobile fetches the image itself from the Image repository along with its
corresponding in-toto metadata.

### Full Verification ECUs

The Primary ECU receives images and metadata from the repositories, and sends
them on to the other ECUs that it updates. Each Full Verification ECU is
extended to perform independent in-toto verification that will be secure even
if the Primary ECU is compromised. Some Full Verification ECUs, for example the
Primary, are also expected to perform in-toto verification on behalf of Partial
Verification ECUs that are resource constrained.

> For every target image the client needs to install, the corresponding in-toto

Reviewer 3: You may wish to refer to the [datadog-checks-downloader](https://github.com/DataDog/integrations-core/blob/df7d87fe2888800bccb49c01a8cc5afa0f016e62/datadog_checks_downloader/datadog_checks/downloader/download.py#L282) for an example of a concrete client verification workflow.

Author: added to refs

layout, links, and keys are identified via the custom field of the existing
Uptane metadata. These files are available as targets on the Image repository.
Therefore, for each installable target, the updater will need to download and
verify the Uptane metadata that signs for the in-toto metadata, either the
Targets role or a delegated role. If verification passes, the actual in-toto
metadata files—layout, links, and public keys—must be downloaded and their
hashes must be compared with the Uptane metadata. With these two checks,
Uptane’s secure delivery properties are extended to the in-toto files. These
files can then be used with confidence by the client to perform in-toto
verification.

### Resource Constrained ECUs

> The addition of in-toto metadata increases the amount of overhead, which can be

Reviewer 3: This extended model neglects the _bandwidth_ overhead imposed by Scudo _within_ a vehicle.

Author: I took a pass at updating the document to address this concern. @mnm678 can you also take a look at the resource constraints section now?

Author: https://github.com/uptane/pures/pull/9/files#diff-dc35087b2004ea6c7b18c597e94ea4ac00627b24fb9ecda73d2aff12054173cdR146

workflow. Scudo assumes that Uptane Partial Verification ECUs are incapable of
performing in-toto verification. However, there may be Uptane Full Verification
ECUs that also lack the resources to perform the added in-toto verification.
This document specifies that other capable ECUs, perhaps the Primary ECU, must
perform in-toto verification on behalf of the resource constrained ECUs. In this
model, while every ECU may not be verifying the software supply chain of the
images it is expected to install, verification is still happening on the
individual automobile. Essentially, there is no difference in the update
workflow of resource constrained ECUs but they are still protected to a degree
by the supply chain verification happening on the automobile.

It is important to note that some automobiles may have no ECUs capable of
providing even a basic level of software supply chain security. Therefore, this
PURE presents a "stop-gap" option. In this configuration, the repository
verifies the software supply chain of the image and signs an in-toto _summary
link_ with the keys used to sign either the top level Targets or delegated

> signer role. This way, the key used to sign the summary link metadata is

Reviewer 3: Odd choice: why not the same keys as the in-toto root layouts? Also, will there be a layout at all in this case?

Author: The verification is performed by the Image repository which is why we pointed to keys that directly map to the repository.

[2020 Sunburst attack](https://www.cynet.com/attack-techniques-hands-on/sunburst-backdoor-c2-communication-protocol/)
that really made both government and corporate CISOs take action. Affecting more
than 100 companies and nine government agencies, the cause of the attack was
Sunburst malware that had been uploaded via a routine update from Orion software
produced by SolarWinds. The attack taught both public and private concerns some
hard lessons, such as:

* The very thing designed to protect the security of software-patches and
  updates that fix routine vulnerabilities-can also be used to deliver malware
  that can damage or corrupt.
* As software products contain third-party components, program developers are
  not in complete control of the contents of their products.
* Malware can linger undetected for extended periods of time, allowing it to
  infect every system that touches it. The Sunburst malicious code was part of
  an update released by SolarWinds in the spring of 2020, yet it was not
  reported until December of that year.

Automotive software supply chains are particularly tempting targets for
attackers. This is because automotive software runs on a large number of

> vehicles and updating all of them to recover quickly from an attack is a

Reviewer 2: Uptane already solves the update part of the problem. It might be better to focus on the huge impact of an attack on cars on the road

Author: I was alluding to a process issue more than delivering the update itself. Getting thousands of vehicles all patched is different from, say, smartphones. Let me try to rephrase.

Author: ```
Automotive software supply chains are particularly tempting targets for
attackers. This is because automotive software runs on a large number of
vehicles and updating all of them to recover quickly from an attack is a
slow and difficult proposition. As such, a successful software supply chain
attack means that thousands (or more) of vehicles are impacted. Any attack that
targets a large number of vehicles on roads can do immeasurable damage. Further,
while Uptane can securely deliver updates to vehicles to recover from the
attack, ensuring every vehicle on the road receives the update immediately is
very difficult given the circumstances of use of these vehicles. Therefore,
strategies that can secure automotive software supply chains are vital to
_avoid_ such attacks altogether.
```

fix vulnerabilities as and when they are discovered.

Unfortunately, SBOMs do not provide end-to-end software supply chain security.
For example, an SBOM would not have prevented an attack that used a compromised
build server as seen in the SolarWinds hack. A more comprehensive framework is
necessary and is described in this document.

## Reasoning

in-toto is a comprehensive framework that secures each step in the software
supply chain. With in-toto, software supply chain owners can enforce policies
pertaining to the flow of artifacts through the supply chain, and provide proof
that authorized people or bots made changes to artifacts at any given step.
Thus, in-toto can be used to secure software from the very first step all the
way through the development pipeline. Furthermore, the framework plays well with
other systems and tools that attempt to secure specific aspects of the software
supply chain. in-toto is integrated into build tools and systems like Jenkins
and Tekton, and is compatible with complementary software supply chain security
efforts such as Grafeas, Sigstore, and Software Bills of Materials.

## Specification

> Note: The reader is expected to be familiar with the in-toto specification.

Reviewer 2: maybe add a link/citation in case someone needs to read the in-toto spec first

We propose in-toto as an option to achieve software supply chain security
alongside the Uptane deployment. In such a model, in-toto can be backed by
the Uptane root of trust, and use Uptane's delegation structure to distribute
all of in-toto's metadata. Essentially, in-toto metadata is used to attest to
the steps performed in the software supply chain itself, while Uptane is used
to securely distribute that metadata alongside the ECU images. This combination
of in-toto for software supply chain guarantees and Uptane for secure
distribution of ECU images and in-toto metadata is called Scudo.

### Modifications to the Repositories and Vehicle Interactions

> In this document, we propose updating one of Uptane's two repositories to store

Reviewer: The "in this document" phrase here reads a bit odd and probably not needed. See suggestion
```suggestion
To implement Scudo, one of Uptane's two repositories will need updating to enable it to store
```

if the Primary ECU is compromised. Some Full Verification ECUs, for example the
Primary, are also expected to perform in-toto verification on behalf of Partial
Verification ECUs that are resource constrained.

For every target image the client needs to install, the corresponding in-toto
layout, links, and keys are identified via the custom field of the existing
Uptane metadata. These files are available as targets on the Image repository.
Therefore, for each installable target, the updater will need to download and
verify the Uptane metadata that signs for the in-toto metadata, either the
Targets role or a delegated role. If verification passes, the actual in-toto
metadata files—layout, links, and public keys—must be downloaded and their
hashes must be compared with the Uptane metadata. With these two checks,
Uptane’s secure delivery properties are extended to the in-toto files. These
files can then be used with confidence by the client to perform in-toto
verification.

### Resource Constrained ECUs

There are a number of different types of resource constraints that accompany the
addition of in-toto metadata. Some automobiles may have no ECUs capable of

> providing even a basic level of software supply chain security. Therefore, this

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
providing even a basic level of software supply chain security due to bandwidth or memory constraints. Therefore, this
```

for the other constraints. A vehicle may simultaneously have no ECUs capable of
full in-toto verification _and_ limited bandwidth for in-vehicle communication.
Similarly, a vehicle may have no ECUs capable of full in-toto verification _and_
some of these ECUs may be incapable of any in-toto verification at all.

## Security Analysis

Scudo is an extension for Uptane that adds in-toto's software supply chain
security properties. Therefore, its threat model is a combination of the threat
models of Uptane for the delivery of the software artifacts, and in-toto for the
development of the image as it passes through the software supply chain.

## Backwards Compatibility

Implementers of Scudo should always consider backwards compatibility. In itself,
this PURE should not introduce any backwards incompatibility to existing Uptane
deployments. However, introducing in-toto into the mix can complicate matters.
Therefore, neither an Uptane nor in-toto implementation should make
backward-incompatible changes to how signatures are generated. This will ensure
that previous package managers are able to continue to install new packages.

> Note that TUF can otherwise be used to safely rotate the keys for the entire

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that Uptane can otherwise be used to safely rotate the keys for the entire
```

# PURE-3

* PURE: 3

> * Title: Scudo: Adding Supply Chain Security Capabilities to Uptane

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Title: Scudo: Addressing Supply Chain Security in Uptane
```

attack means that thousands (or more) of vehicles are impacted. Any attack that
targets a large number of vehicles on roads can do immeasurable damage. Further,
while Uptane can securely deliver updates to vehicles to recover from the
attack, ensuring every vehicle on the road receives the update immediately is
very difficult given the circumstances of use of these vehicles. Therefore,
strategies that can secure automotive software supply chains are vital to
_avoid_ such attacks altogether.

Governments around the world have recognized this fact. Regulations are
forthcoming from the United Nations and other governing bodies, and standards
have been published that specify how software running on automobiles must be
secured. President Biden of the United States of America issued an Executive
Order describing the need to improve the nation's cybersecurity. This EO, in
particular, pushes for solutions like Software Bills of Materials (SBOMs) that
list the components of software artifacts. This information is vital in ensuring
developers are aware of the components in their supply chain so that they can
fix vulnerabilities as and when they are discovered.

> Unfortunately, SBOMs do not provide end-to-end software supply chain security.

Reviewer 4: Should clarify this more.  Perhaps use some details from the Verifiable SBOMs document as a basis for attacks that are not covered...

Author: I added a bit more but steered clear of diving into the possible incompleteness of SBOMs that also arises in the v-sboms work.

For example, an SBOM would not have prevented an attack that used a compromised
build server as seen in the SolarWinds hack. A more comprehensive framework is
necessary and is described in this document.

## Reasoning

in-toto is a comprehensive framework that secures each step in the software
supply chain. With in-toto, software supply chain owners can enforce policies
pertaining to the flow of artifacts through the supply chain, and provide proof
that authorized people or bots made changes to artifacts at any given step.
Thus, in-toto can be used to secure software from the very first step all the

> way through the development pipeline. Furthermore, the framework plays well with

Reviewer 4: Name drop some integrations here.

Author: The following sentence lists integrations:

```
in-toto is integrated into build tools and systems like Jenkins
and Tekton, and is compatible with complementary software supply chain security
efforts such as Grafeas, Sigstore, and Software Bills of Materials.
```

other systems and tools that attempt to secure specific aspects of the software
supply chain. in-toto is integrated into build tools and systems like Jenkins
and Tekton, and is compatible with complementary software supply chain security
efforts such as Grafeas, Sigstore, and Software Bills of Materials.

## Specification

Note: The reader is expected to be familiar with the
[in-toto Specification](https://github.com/in-toto/docs/blob/master/in-toto-spec.md).

> We propose in-toto as an option to achieve software supply chain security

Reviewer 4: as an option?  Do you mean something more like: We describe how in-toto could be used to achieve...

alongside the Uptane deployment. In such a model, in-toto can be backed by
the Uptane root of trust, and use Uptane's delegation structure to distribute
all of in-toto's metadata. Essentially, in-toto metadata is used to attest to
the steps performed in the software supply chain itself, while Uptane is used
to securely distribute that metadata alongside the ECU images. This combination
of in-toto for software supply chain guarantees and Uptane for secure
distribution of ECU images and in-toto metadata is called Scudo.

### Modifications to the Repositories and Vehicle Interactions

> To implement Scudo, one of Uptane's two repositories will need updating to

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To implement Scudo, one of Uptane's two repositories will need  to be updated to
```

enable it to store in-toto metadata alongside the images. The Image repository

> is recommended as its contents are typically signed for using offline keys,

Reviewer 4: I'd just recommend stating this paragraph with recommending the Image repo instead of sounding like there is a choice first.

Author: Updated:

```
To implement Scudo, Uptane's Image repository will need to be updated to enable
it to store in-toto metadata alongside the images. While the Director repository
can also be used, the Image repository is recommended as its contents are
typically signed for using offline keys.
```

in-vehicle communication bandwidth is not constrained. As before, the in-toto
verification process used can be either the full workflow or the stop-gap
option, as this choice does not affect individual ECUs, but only the setup as a
whole.

Note that the stop-gap option can be employed in conjunction with the solutions
for the other constraints. A vehicle may simultaneously have no ECUs capable of
full in-toto verification _and_ limited bandwidth for in-vehicle communication.
Similarly, a vehicle may have no ECUs capable of full in-toto verification _and_
some of these ECUs may be incapable of any in-toto verification at all.

## Security Analysis

Scudo is an extension for Uptane that adds in-toto's software supply chain
security properties. Therefore, its threat model is a combination of the threat
models of Uptane for the delivery of the software artifacts, and in-toto for the
development of the image as it passes through the software supply chain.

## Backwards Compatibility

Implementers of Scudo should always consider backwards compatibility. In itself,
this PURE should not introduce any backwards incompatibility to existing Uptane

> deployments. However, introducing in-toto into the mix can complicate matters.

Reviewer 4: How can it complicate matters?

Author: I updated the full section and noted some specific points of concern.

Therefore, neither an Uptane nor in-toto implementation should make
backward-incompatible changes to how signatures are generated. This will ensure
that previous package managers are able to continue to install new packages.
Note that Uptane can otherwise be used to safely rotate the keys for the entire
system, including those using different key types, key sizes, signature schemes,
and cryptographic hashes. Any backwards incompatible changes that are
unavoidable should be handled with a clear plan, perhaps making use of the

> semantics introduced in TAP-14.

Reviewer 4: This is in draft stage and should likely not be referenced

## Copyright

This document has been placed in the public domain.

## Acknowledgements

This PURE was inspired by two in-toto Enhancements, ITE-2 and ITE-3, that
describe how TUF, Uptane's parent project, and in-toto can be combined.

## References

* [in-toto Specification](https://github.com/in-toto/docs/blob/master/in-toto-spec.md)
* [Uptane v2.0.0 Standard](https://uptane.github.io/papers/uptane-standard.2.0.0.html)
* [Scudo Whitepaper](https://uptane.github.io/papers/scudo-whitepaper.pdf)
* [ITE-2](https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/blob/master/ITE/2/README.adoc)
* [ITE-3](https://github.com/in-toto/ITE/blob/master/ITE/3/README.adoc)
* [Sonatype's 2022 State of the Software Supply Chain report](https://www.sonatype.com/state-of-the-software-supply-chain/introduction)
* [2020 Sunburst attack](https://www.cynet.com/attack-techniques-hands-on/sunburst-backdoor-c2-communication-protocol/)

> * [Datadog's Verification of TUF and in-toto metadata](https://github.com/DataDog/integrations-core/blob/df7d87fe2888800bccb49c01a8cc5afa0f016e62/datadog_checks_downloader/datadog_checks/downloader/download.py#L282)

Reviewer 4: I think promoting this more up front as a POC is important

Author: I added a prototype section that talks about this.

Author: cc @trishankatdatadog

attack, ensuring every vehicle on the road receives the update immediately is
very difficult given the circumstances of use of these vehicles. Therefore,
strategies that can secure automotive software supply chains are vital to
_avoid_ such attacks altogether.

Governments around the world have recognized this fact. Regulations are
forthcoming from the United Nations and other governing bodies, and standards
have been published that specify how software running on automobiles must be
secured. President Biden of the United States of America issued an Executive
Order describing the need to improve the nation's cybersecurity. This EO, in
particular, pushes for solutions like Software Bills of Materials (SBOMs) that
list the components of software artifacts. This information is vital in ensuring
developers are aware of the components in their supply chain so that they can
fix vulnerabilities as and when they are discovered. For example, an SBOM would
help developers react quickly to situations like 2021's log4j incident by
informing them of the software products that require patches or updates.

Unfortunately, SBOMs do not provide end-to-end software supply chain security.

> They do not guarantee of the integrity of the operations performed as part of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They do not guarantee either the integrity of the operations performed as part of
```

> the software supply chain and the artifacts they consume and produce. They do

Reviewer: There's a lot of "theys" in this sentence. The first "they" is clearly the SBOMs. Is the next "they" still the SBOMs? Maybe rephrase as below
```suggestion
the software supply chain, or the artifacts the SBOMs consume and produce. An SBOM also can
```

not help with verifying that each operation was performed by authorized actors,

> or indeed that all required operations were in fact performed. An SBOM would not

Reviewer: I added a few words at the beginning of this section so its clear why an SBOM would not have worked. If this connection is wrong, then please replace with the actual reason. 
```suggestion
or indeed that all required operations were in fact performed. For these reasons, an SBOM would not
```
